# fs2zef

This folder contains the Matlab function [`run`](./run.m), which can be used to
generate a segmentation with the aid of the [FreeSurfer] software suite. The
folder also houses a segmentation import script
[`import_segmentation.zef`](./import_segmentation.zef), which is to be given to
Zeffiro Interface to import the segmentation generated by FreeSurfer.

[FreeSurfer]: https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/

## Generating a segmentation with FreeSurfer

This is done by navigating to the parent folder of this folder and invoking the
[`run`](./run.m) function on the Matlab command line with

	utilities.fs2zef.run(segmentation_output_folder, recon_all_output_folder [,recon_all_input_files])

where

* `segmentation_output_folder` is the (already existing) folder you want the
  segmentation ASCII files to end up into,
* `recon_all_output_folder` is the folder that contains (or is to contain) the
  output of the FreeSurfer program [recon-all] and
* `recon_all_input_files` is an optional string array of paths to [recon-all]
  input files, either *a single* NIFTI (`.nii`) file, or *1 or multiple* DICOM
  (`.dcm`) files.

To see help for [`fs2zef`](./fs2zef.m), type

	help utilities.fs2zef.run

or

	doc utilities.fs2zef.run

on the Matlab command line.

[recon-all]: https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/recon-all#Name

## Importing a segmentation into Zeffiro

This folder contains a file
[`import_segmentation.zef`](./import_segmentation.zef), which allows one to
import a surface segmentation consisting of a set of ASCII files to the
Zeffiro Interface (ZI), Copyright © Sampsa Pursiainen, 2018. For importing,
this file should be placed in the folder containing the files and opened via
ZI's import menu item 'Import segmentation from folder (ASCII)'. The files can
be either DAT files containing either points or triangles, or ASC files
exported from the FreeSurfer Software Suite, Copyright © Freesufer, 2013.

In the former case, the folder must contain two files per each triangular
tissue surface mesh (`filename_points.dat` and `filename_triangles.dat`),
whereas in the latter case a single file is needed (`filename.asc`) per a
mesh. Each line in the list below corresponds to a single mesh. Each
compartment in the segmentation is described by one or more meshes which will
be automatically merged in the import process. The compartment identifiers are
the following:

	sensor_points, sensor_directions, white_matter, grey_matter, csf, skull, skin, detail_1, detail_2, …, detail_22.

Of these, a mesh for each tissue compartment is specified by a single
comma-separated line of the following form:

	filename, compartment_name, scaling, sigma, priority, activity, name, invert, extension

Here, the `filename` appears without any extensions; `compartment_name` is as
in the list above, scaling, sigma and priority parameters are as in ZI's
segmentation window with 0 corresponding to the default value; `activity` is a
number describing the activity of the compartment (0 = inactive, 1 =
constrained activity, 2 = unconstrained activity, or 3 = inner cortex [for
`white_matter` only]); `name` is the compartment name as it appears in ZI;
`invert` is for inverting an inward-pointing surface normal (0=not inverted,
1=inverted); and `extension` is either `.asc` or `.dat` for FreeSurfer and
other meshes, respectively.

In the special case of `sensor_points` and `sensor_directions`, it is only
possible to use the DAT format. Each one of these is imported via a single
file (filename.dat), and the line for importing is of the form

	filename, compartment name, scaling, x-translation, y-translation, z-translation, xy-rotation, yz-rotation, zx-rotation

The scaling, translating and rotation parameters are as they appear in ZI's
segmentation tool, and selecting 0 for them, means that the default value will
be used. Each compartment-specific parameter can be imported only once. In
case there are multiple definitions in the list for a single compartment, only
the first one counts.

Once the segmentation is in place and the import script has been written as
insructed above, the segmentation is imported by going into **Zeffiro
Interface → Menu tool → Import → Import data to a new project**, and
navigating to the `import_segmentation.zef` file in the
`segmentation_output_folder` of [`run`](./run.m). The segmentation will
then be imported to Zeffiro, and finite element mesh construction can start.
